Introduction
The European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) is currently the largest carbon trading system in the world, unless and until it is overtaken by the Chinese national carbon trading scheme planned for introduction in 2017 (Jotzo and Löschel, 2014 ;  Zhang et al., 2014). Although the EU ETS is meeting its core objective – EU emissions covered by the scheme remain below the total emissions cap – it is sometimes described as having ‘failed’ because prices are too low to incentivise substantial short-run emissions reductions and too volatile to provide adequate long-run incentives for investments in clean technologies.

European Allowances (EUAs) – the unit of compliance – have traded below €10 from 2013 onwards (EEX 2016). The price is below most estimates of the social cost of carbon for example as used in US government regulatory analysis (Greenstone et al., 2014; Goulder and Williams, 2012; United States Interagency Group, 2015). It is also low relative to the implicit price used internally by many companies when making their investment decisions. For instance, several multinational oil companies use internal screening prices of US $40/€35 or more (Kossoy et al., 2015), even though they operate in jurisdictions that are, on the whole, subject to lighter carbon regulation than in Europe.

There are various reasons for the low EUA prices. These include the reduction in economic output and emissions following the financial crisis, the complementary EU policies on renewables and energy efficiency (Koch et al., 2014), and the volume of international credits from Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) offsets available to partly acquit emissions obligations within the EU ETS (Ellerman et al., 2016 ;  Laing et al., 2013). Emissions allowances issued each year began to exceed actual annual emissions in 2009 (Redman and Convery, 2014) and a large surplus has been built up through banking. EUAs trade at above-zero prices only because of the expectation that the cap will be binding at some point in the future (Edenhofer et al., 2014).

The simplest way to increase EUA prices would be to reduce the total allowances in circulation. The 2030 Climate and Energy Reform Package (European Council, 2014) decided that the annual (linear) reduction factor for the EU ETS will be increased from 1.74 to 2.2 percent per annum from 2021-2030. By reducing the allowances issued in each future year, this policy change would be expected to lead to increasing EUA prices in the long run. And, because markets are forward-looking and EUAs can be banked into later periods, an impact on current prices would be expected. However, the impact of the announcement on current prices has been limited and concern remains that current prices are not sending appropriate signals to industry.

Another direct way of raising EUA prices would be to establish a price floor, which could be implemented through a minimum (reserve) price for newly issued EUAs at auction (Roberts and Spence, 1976; Weitzman, 1978 ;  Hepburn et al., 2006; Wood and Jotzo, 2009). This would reduce the supply of EUAs to a level that achieves any desired minimum price in the spot market. The California, Quebec and Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) trading programs all operate with a price floor (ICAP, 2016), and in each of these programs the price floor has been binding in at least one auction and the price has subsequently risen above the floor. Price floors can be combined with price ceilings to form price collars or corridors (Burtraw et al., 2010 ;  Fell et al., 2012).

Options for reform
In November 2012, the European Commission released a paper on the “The state of the European carbon market in 2012” and proposed several structural measures to reform the EU ETS (European Commission, 2012) outside of the usual review cycle. These measures included two policies that caught the interest of economists, and triggered the research consortium that has led to this special issue of the Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.

The first policy proposal was to “backload” – postpone the issuance of – 900 million allowances from 2014-2016 auctions to 2019-2020 auctions. This idea was put into legislation in early 2014, but it had limited impact on prices. The second measure was the introduction of a Market Stability Reserve (MSR), which withdraws or contributes allowances in circulation by adjusting the supply in each auction. The MSR might be described as a quantity-based rule aimed at balancing supply and demand (European Union, 2015),1 operating as follows. If the total number of allowances in circulation2 is

•
less than 400 m, then the MSR releases 100 m allowances into circulation unless the MSR is empty;
•
between 400 m and 833 m, then the market functions without intervention;
•
greater than 833 m, then the MSR absorbs 12 per cent of allowances in circulation each year by deducting them from future auctions.
Understanding EU law and politics is central to understanding the design of the MSR. Like the EU ETS itself, the MSR does not impose a price floor or directly control EUA prices. One motivation for this was to avoid the MSR being perceived to be “primarily of a fiscal nature” under article 192 §2 of the Lisbon Treaty (European Union, 2007) requiring unanimity of EU members for adoption. This was a vital condition because several EU countries were expected to oppose an instrument of fiscal nature at the European level and at least one EU country was thought likely to use its veto to block any intervention in the EU ETS that would increase stringency. The specific design of the MSR thus avoided this problem. Further, the MSR dodges the problem of agreeing upon the specific level for the price floor or corridor. This was thought to be more difficult than agreeing upon the thresholds for withdrawal and injection of permits.

The proposed mechanism raised a series of research questions with implications for policy design. Led by the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW Berlin), an international research consortium was formed in 2014 to support the European Commission by considering the design options using different models and different methodological approaches – theoretical and experimental. Consortium members were drawn from a dozen different institutions in the EU, USA, and Australia.3

Research questions
A range of questions about the MSR were considered. What precisely is the imperfection that the MSR is attempting to address? Could shuffling allowances between periods, without changing the lifetime cap, ever affect the price? It should not as long as the regulator has made available enough permits for efficient behaviour to be feasible (Salant, 2016). Could other market or regulatory failures limit intertemporal smoothing by market participants? Neuhoff et al. (2012) had argued that market participants had limited capacity to bank emission allowances at social discount rates, to which Salant responds. In contrast, Trotignon et al. (2015) argued the problems of low current prices may arise due to imperfect responses to uncertainty and complexity.

Regulatory uncertainty is very difficult if not impossible to eliminate, because new governments can make new decisions. Might the MSR be seen as an ad hoc intervention that undermines credibility? Or could the MSR send an informative signal to market participants about the future direction of policy and the willingness and ability of the EU to strengthen the EU ETS to meet long-run goals? Such a signal may be helpful when expectations about future conditions play an important role in price formation (Edenhofer et al., 2014). Notwithstanding the large current surpluses of EUAs, for instance, the EUA price remains positive, indicating that the market implicitly expects the emission cap to bind in the future.

How are real firms and real human traders likely to react to the MSR, given their imperfect information, behavioural biases, and less than full confidence in the long-term structure of the EU ETS? Is it significant that market actors have different return requirements and thus discount rates, dependent on whether they hold allowances to hedge contract positions at virtually no risk, or whether they hold allowances as speculative investments to arbitrage prices over time, as Schopp et al. (2015) propose? Can the introduction of a MSR change the marginal buyer of allowances and thus change the discount rate applied to anticipated scarcity prices?

Furthermore, could the MSR actually increase price volatility, given that the total number of allowances in circulation is calculated with a two-year lag? Edenhofer et al. (2014) argued that the uncertainty created by new data arriving with such a long delay could affect current investment decisions and lead to pro-cyclical dynamics.

Would the MSR create incentives at the thresholds? Consider the following. As emission reductions occur, the number of allowances in circulation increases. At the threshold, the MSR would function to remove EUAs from the market, which would push up EUA prices, incentivising greater emission reductions.

Summary of papers
The consortium proceeded to explore research questions relevant to designing and implementing the MSR. Given the timing of the European policy agenda – with the Climate and Energy package in October 2014 and final decisions on the MSR to be made in 2015 – papers were presented and discussed at a September 2014 Workshop at DIW Berlin, and at a special policy session at the European Association of Environmental and Resource Economics conference in Helsinki in June 2015. This special issue comprises a set of five relevant papers that address key questions about the functioning of the MSR.

Stephen Salant opens the issue. He observes that underlying the proof that cap-and-trade minimises abatement costs is the assumption that the regulator does not intervene in the market ex post. The MSR is precisely such an ex post intervention. Salant develops a theoretical model to show that the ongoing risk of future regulatory intervention creates inefficiencies that imply the cap is achieved at needlessly higher cost. Moreover, as Koch et al. (2016) have confirmed empirically, unanticipated changes in either this risk or the nature of the future intervention will result in sudden price jumps, exacerbating the misallocations. His conclusions are therefore that while the current problems in the EU ETS do require attention, they should be addressed once-and-for-all with the introduction of an automatic stabiliser to avoid the need for any further regulatory intervention. Salant is, however, sceptical that the MSR is the best automatic stabiliser.

Grischa Perino and Maximilian Willner reach a similar conclusion for different reasons. They develop a dynamic optimisation model where the MSR does nothing to the overall lifetime cap, and where firms are risk-neutral, symmetric and operating in a frictionless market. Under these idealised assumptions they find that an MSR intervention might not induce the desired incentives to invest in low-carbon technologies as prices are higher in the short run but lower in the medium run with the MSR than without. In contrast to what has been argued above, higher current prices might hence not signal future scarcity but exactly the opposite because the MSR constrains intertemporal arbitrage. Perino and Willner also find that the MSR may amplify, rather than dampen, demand shocks.

Sascha Kollenberg and Luca Taschini propose a general model in which cap stringency is adjusted in response to shocks, parametrised by an “adjustment rate”. At one extreme is a pure quantity instrument, where the cap is never adjusted; at the other a pure price instrument, where the current allocation of permits is perfectly adjusted in response to shocks. As the ETS design moves away from a pure quantity instrument (i.e. as cap stringency is relaxed), the opportunity for intertemporal arbitrage is reduced. In the extreme, under a fixed price regime, firms are collectively unable to benefit from differences in marginal cost over time. However, the same relaxation of cap stringency also makes the mechanism more resilient to supply-demand imbalances, with lower costs implied in adjustments of firms’ strategies to shocks. The optimal position on the quantity-price spectrum is determined by equating the marginal cost of more limited intertemporal arbitrage with the marginal benefit of greater resilience to shocks. Kollenberg and Taschini note that the EU ETS MSR provides very limited flexibility; while there is a temporary adjustment, the overall cap is fixed. They show that an automatic mechanism allowing cap stringency to be increased or relaxed would reduce compliance costs.

In “Comparing Policies to Confront Permit Over-Allocation”, Harrison Fell uses a stochastic dynamic model parameterised to values suitable for the EU ETS. He uses the model to compare the MSR to price collars and allowance reduction policies. He finds that an ETS with an MSR is superior to one without, in the sense that it has lower price variation and lower expected abatement costs. A price collar can in principle achieve the same expected emissions as an MSR with lower price variation and expected abatement cost. Both the MSR and the price collar performed better than policies that directly reduce allowances.

Finally Charles Holt and William Shobe run an experiment to explore likely behaviour of market participants trading on an ETS with an MSR. Their experimental setting uses actual human subjects who come with their own behavioural heuristics and biases, biases which may or may not match those assumed by the designers of the MSR. They find that a quantity-based MSR can prevent agents from maintaining their preferred level of banking. The preferred bank is endogenously determined as the market unfolds. Any particular trigger set by the regulator will induce hard-to-predict defensive expenditures by market participants. One key laboratory result is that price variability is increased. This is consistent with predictions by Perino and Willner (2016). In short, Holt and Shobe find in their experiments that an MSR could be worse than no MSR. They also find that a “price collar”, which adjusts the available supply at extreme prices, outperforms the MSR in their experiments.

Conclusions
What are the major conclusions for policy makers from the papers in this special issue? In the modelling studies, a well-calibrated price floor or price collar (corridor) consistently led to lower price volatility than an MSR. Most of the authors in this issue would therefore suggest a price floor or corridor would be a preferable approach to an MSR. However, a robust identification of the optimal price level is difficult given the many uncertainties. The MSR has its own challenges in robustly specifying the quantity thresholds, but avoids specifying an explicit price floor that might have triggered a challenge from one or more EU member states. The legal and political issues specific to the EU were among the main motivations for selecting this category of intervention, given the political constraints of reforming a scheme operating in 28 European countries.

Once it was accepted that an MSR would be put into practice, the main design challenge for policy makers was the choice of appropriate trigger levels of surplus allowances above which allowances are transferred into or returned from the MSR. The papers in this special issue do not give clear guidance to that question, but Neuhoff et al. (2015) recommend a periodic review of these trigger levels based on reported data based on hedging demands, which are largely concentrated with and reported by the power sector. Salant’s article in this issue would advise differently, arguing for a one-time adjustment. In the event, the recommendation of Neuhoff et al. (2015) appears to have been adopted and the first review is required in 2021.

In summary, has the MSR given the EU ETS the shot in the arm as intended? As of 2016, it might seem not. EUA prices remain low. Market confidence appears limited. Longer-term expectations about evolving 2030 policy and the impact of a possible “Brexit” enhance regulatory risks. However, the full impacts of the MSR may only be observed once it commences operation in 2019 and is filled with allowances, likely in the early 2020s. Before then, the jury is out. But one important lesson from this special issue does shine through. Countries implementing a new ETS would be wise to incorporate, from the outset, a well-designed automatic stabilisation mechanism to ensure that the scheme meets its objectives, to avoid the need for ad hoc, ex post regulatory intervention.